How we paid the hidden costs of bootstrapping Tideways
======================================================

Justin Jackson started an extremely interesting discussion about the
`Bootstrappers paradox <https://justinjackson.ca/bootstrap-reality/>`_ and the
`hidden costs of bootstrapping <https://justinjackson.ca/cost/>`_ with `replies
from many others <https://saas.transistor.fm/episodes/your-revenue-forecast-is-wrong>`_. In this
series of posts (there are more) he is discussing how hard bootstrapping a SaaS
business is in the first few years, when you are essentially investing a lot of
personal time and money until you can finally get a return on this investment
and pay yourself a decent salary.

::

    All bootstrappers have to deal with the same tension: can I get this to
    scale, while paying my bills, without burning out?

This is something I am thinking about a lot to understand the journey and
history of Tideways and by writing about my thoughts I can share my
unconventional route for bootstrapping a SaaS. 

In his post Jason projects the growh to suistainable $ 20.000 MRR to take 5
years, which is much to long for my taste. We projected to reach 20.000€ MRR (~
$23.000) after three years, and missing this target would probably have meant a
shutdown or sale of Tideways. We reached this goal almost exactly with 5-15%
revenue growth per month and less than Jason's 5% expected monthly churn.

What went into funding Tideways?

- I was able to invest 50+ hours/week and  live on 50-75% of my previous salary
  for two years only because I don't have credits to pay, my wife and I don't
  have kids, and no large monthly expenses. We saved up some money that we used
  to get through this time.

- My employer Qafoo allowed me to work on Tideways a few days per month and
  invested a lot of their own time after we decided to found a company together
  and test product market fit.

- Our business partner SysEleven was willing to sponsor hosting for Tideways in
  return for a lifetime supply of discounted licenses for almost all their
  customers.

I consider points 3/4 "unconventional" ways of funding Tideways: I gave up some
shares in the business to work on the business at full salary during the
prototype and product market fit time. For the monthly expenses I found
sponsors that wanted to buy the product when its done to pay for all the
monthly costs.

If you sum all these investments up (my salary, Qafoo's development rate,
SysEleven Hosting, other costs) now, they amount to around 500.000€
investment over 3 years that Tideways would have required. From these a good
portion could have been paid from customer revenue, but especially in the early
month with no or little revenue there would have been monthly costs > 10.000€
exceeding revenue significantly.

Maybe raising 500.000€ would be possible in hindsight, but without previous
founding experience and no connections to investors I don't know if I would
have succeeded.

I consider this a similar approach to `Fundstrapping
<https://rsvp.customer.io/bootstrapping-vs-vc-funded-youre-asking-the-wrong-question-926167386374>`_
but instead of money you get freedom, time and resources from your investors.

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
